All right, listen up.
Lieutenant Tsurumi sent
a telegram that he'll stop
at Noboribetsu, then
head out to Karafuto.
He said that in two weeks,
he'll meet us in Oodomari.
Until then he wants us
to remain here.
So, get comfortable.
We'll be staying for a while.
This is good news. Toyohara is
bigger and has better inns.
Enjoy it while you can.
Dismissed!
Do whatever you want.
Got a sec?
[SUGIMOTO]
Hmm?
Back when Kiroranke died,
I saw Asirpa whisper something
in his ear.
He had this look of relief on
his face, then said something
about leaving things to her.
It's suspicious.
Maybe Asirpa's figured out the
key to finding the stolen gold?
What if Ogata tried to kill her
because he knows, too?
There wouldn't be any reason
to keep her alive anymore.
Don't bring it up.
[HAJIME]
Hmm?
I'll talk to her.
Leave it to me.
[SUGIMOTO]
I know Asirpa.
And even though she hasn't met
Lieutenant Tsurumi yet...
...she would never open up
to a man like him.
I promise you that.
Huh?
[MAN 41A speaking AINU]
[speaking AINU]
[laughter]
[CIKAPASI] They said they were
curious 'bout us because
we're close to their kotan.
It was a good thing
we brought you along.
This would be a lot harder
if people were wary of us.
But you keep saying
the same thing.
So now everybody
in Karafuto knows that
I have giant testicles.
Though I have to admit,
I'm glad I didn't send you back.
Pretending to be a family worked
before, back in Hokkaido.
I miss that.
I hope Inkarmat is okay.
From the telegram,
she's recovered enough
to be walking around now.
Really? That's great news!
[TANIGAKI]
Uh-huh.
Let's visit her
once we get back.
[ENONOKA]
Cikapasi?
Are you leaving?
Huh?
Hey, Sugimoto!
Take a look at this.
[SUGIMOTO]
Is it poop?
[ASIRPA] Tracks. Made by
one of those wolverines
you were talking about.
Oh, yeah. They're
faster and more dangerous
than the bears around
here, so be careful.
I wish I could've seen one.
I know! Why don't we catch it?
It would be a shame if we
left without finding out
what wolverine brains
taste like, wouldn't it?
[SUGIMOTO]
All brains taste the same to me!
[ASIRPA] Before we head
into the mountains,
let's start a fire and pray.
Even though you're a new kind
of Ainu, you still really care
about those rituals, huh?
[ASIRPA] The mountains have
dangers hidden all around.
Doing these rituals helps me
keep my mind focused.
And we have matches now.
So we hardly ever use
these tools anymore.
This gives me a reason
to keep them.
Otherwise, they'll be
lost to time.
[HAJIME]
Hmm?!
[speaking Russian]
[MAN]
Wait, Ainu child!
[SUGIMOTO]
Hmm?
I've never seen anything
so fascinating. Incredible!
Would you mind starting that
from the beginning?
And who the hell are you two
supposed to be?
Filmmakers!
We make "moving pictures."
A "moving picture"?
[WOLVERINE 41A snarls]
[BOTH]
Wolverine!
[screams]
Get it off of me!
Get away from it!
I don't have a shot!
How about now?!
[SUGIMOTO gasps]
Asirpa, behind you!
[ASIRPA grunts]
[WOLVERINE 41A growling]
[FILMMAKER panting]
How magnificent!
Did you catch all of that?!
Don't get close!
That's not enough to kill it!
[roars]
You lucked out and got
to try wolverine after all!
Hinna, hinna, isnt it?
[SUGIMOTO] Hmm... It tastes just
like the last brain I ate.
Well, anyway.
What the hell are
you people doing here?
[FILMMAKER]
We're on a mission to film
how the Karafuto Ainu live.
But at some point we got
separated in the mountains.
So then is that thing
some kind of camera?
[FILMMAKER] It is. This is
called a cinematograph.
It takes dozens of pictures
in a short amount of time.
And when you put all those
pictures side by side,
you can see things like
the passage of time.
Or how people move.
We've used this cinematograph
to record many different aspects
of Ainu culture!
They were invented by Lumière.
That's a company in France.
Of course, it's started
a filmmaking boom
all over the world.
It's even come here,
with a bunch of films
being made in Japan now!
This man is Girel, my operator.
And as for me,
Katsutaro Inaba.
My company bought the rights
to screen films in Japan
from Lumière.
These are going to be
the future of entertainment!
Interesting. How do you watch?
[CIKAPASI]
Look at that! It's moving!
[ENONOKA]
The pictures are dancing!
[gasping]
I'm glad you like it. We're in
Karafuto to meet the Ainu here.
I already filmed the Ainu in
Hokkaido, and the higher ups
at Lumière couldn't get enough.
Right?
This is amazing!
Do you have any more dances?
Or old tales? Any yukar?
How about uepeker?
[INABA] Unfortunately,
we can't film any stories.
You see, this device
can't record sound.
You mean we can't leave
our voices with the pictures?
Then let's act out
old Ainu stories,
so they can be saved on film!
That's what you've come up with?
You want to put on
a play and film it?
Uh.... Well, I have
filmed kabuki before.
But Ainu stories are oral.
It won't be easy.
Plus, wouldn't a
gramophone work just fine?
After all, Ainu don't even have
the concept of a play.
But think, we could tell it
better with movements!
Also, this way, we can share
our stories with people
around the world who don't
understand our language!
Be serious--I'm running
a business here.
I've got better things to do
with my time than film something
that might not even be
that interesting.
I promise it'll be good.
I'll do whatever it takes!
You better do what
the girl says, okay?
If Asirpa hadn't saved your
sorry ass, both of you
would be that
wolverine's dinner.
You owe her, you ingrate.
[ASIRPA] Our first story will be
The Tale of Panampe and Penampe!
It's a classic Ainu folktale.
Panampe means
"one who lives downstream,"
while Penampe means
"one who lives upstream."
See, Panampe always
does something
that makes him wealthy.
Then Penampe gets jealous
and tries to copy him.
But he always fails 'cause he's
such a colossal dickhead.
Oh, so it's like
"The Old Man and the Devils."
[ASIRPA] Panampe will be
played by Sugimoto!
And Penampe will be Shiraishi!
Here's a script
based on what she said.
[ASIRPA]
All right, everyone settle!
And...!
Action!
[ASIRPA] One day, Panampe
drilled a hole in the ice over
a river and stuck
his dick in it.
This is one hell of
a weird start, you know!
[ASIRPA] All the fish swam
towards his dick.
So he gathered them all up
and took them home with him.
Which made his wife very happy!
Cut! Come on, what was that?!
Use your brains!
You just found a ton of food in
the middle of a harsh winter.
What's with that expression?
Would it kill you to look
a little more excited?
Remember, we can't add voices
to this, so you need to put
a lot more feeling
into your performance!
Otherwise, nobody
will understand it!
[SUGIMOTO]
Right. I'm sorry.
[ASIRPA]
Life was good for a while.
Until Penampe visited
Panampe's home to ask how
he had become so wealthy.
Penampe followed his
instructions and stuck
his dick in the river.
But he got greedy, and let it
sit there all night long.
Because of that,
his dick froze,
and he couldn't pull
it out of the ice.
So, his wife tried to
break him free with an axe.
But she cut his dick clean off!
And Penampe died like
the moron he was.
[SUGIMOTO] What the hell
kind of story is this?!
[ASIRPA]
That house is in the way!
Go and see if
we can tear it down!
Are you crazy?!
So, have you talked to her yet?
You said that you would.
We don't have much time.
Remember what I told you
about interfering.
Tsukishima, what were you
whispering to Sugimoto about?
I bet you're trying to get
more screen time, aren't you?
The Tale of Panampe
and Penampe, Part Two!
Everyone! Places!
Action!
One day, Panampe
was at the shoreline,
stretching out his dick.
This story makes zero sense!
[ASIRPA] And so, his dick made
it all the way to Matsumae.
[SHIRAISHI] Hey, Russian,
get out of the frame!
[ASIRPA] The women of Matsumae
Province thought his dick
would be perfect for hanging
their clothes to dry,
and hung their expensive
kimonos on it.
When he pulled his dick in,
it brought many fine
kimonos back with it.
And so, life was
good for a while.
Until Penampe visited
Panampe's home to ask how
he had become so wealthy.
When he told him, Penampe tried
stretching his own dick.
The women of
Matsumae flocked around it,
but now they knew
this rod stole kimonos.
So, they chopped off his dick.
And Penampe died
like the moron he was.
[SUGIMOTO] Does he die
at the end every time?
So bad.
The acting can't
convey the story!
What's wrong, Asirpa?
You've been acting weird.
It can't last like this.
At this rate...
Why don't we try another tale?
How about one
with less dicks in it?
You're right, Sugimoto.
Let's try it.
[NARRATOR] Almost all of Panampe
and Penampe's stories involve
dicks in one way or another!
Listen up! Now we're telling
the story of the kesorap!
It's a folktale that
involves three brothers!
Cikapasi will be the star!
--[gasps]
--That's great, Cikapasi!
Ready.
Action!
I have two brothers. One older,
and one younger than me.
The three of us would
go hunting together.
One day, while we were out
hunting, we came across a house.
Inside, there were three girls.
All of us ate the fish
we caught together.
Then sang a yukar.
Suddenly, a suspicious man
barged into the house.
My older brother shouted to me
to drive him off with a stick.
So, I did!
It turns out it was a big bear
pretending to be human.
Because the only people
in the house were girls,
they couldn't hunt bears
for their meat.
And they were very
grateful for our help.
Then we left to go
on a long journey.
But we found ourselves
at the girls' home again.
Their father came
to me and asked me
to marry one of the girls.
I agreed, and became
a member of their household.
After that, I settled down
with my new family.
[ENONOKA giggles]
[CIKAPASI]
Ah...
[ASIRPA] Then, to my surprise,
my older brother told me
that he wasn't actually a
human, but a bird kamuy
called a kesorap.
Before my very eyes,
he transformed into
a beautiful bird, and
flew high into the sky.
Lift him up!
Put your back into it!
Why is he so heavy?!
[ASIRPA]
Hey, Cikapasi!
What's with that
dumb look on your face?
How are people supposed
to know what you're feeling?
Put yourself in the scene.
This man is your family!
He took you in
when you had nothing!
You went on a journey, and even
fought evil kamuy with him!
He's been with you at every
turn, and he's the reason
you grew up to be
a strong young man!
This is your chance
to say goodbye before
he leaves forever!
The tears of the giant bird
turned into rain.
And fell back down
to water the earth.
Bye, Tanigaki Nispa...
[TANIGAKI yells, grunts]
That was perfect!
Tell me you got it all!
[INABA] Luckily, we were
able to rent out a theater
for the premiere.
And it's all thanks
to Lieutenant Koito!
Looks like Mister Moneybags
went all out this time.
[ALL gasping]
You didn't tell me that you
could see my balls!
[KOITO]
Hmph!
[HAJIME]
Hmm...
[ENONOKA gasps]
[gasping]
[VASILI]
Hmm.
[SHIRAISHI]
Hold on.
I don't remember
filming this part.
We didn't.
It looks like
a Karafuto Ainu house.
Yup, that's right!
Girel noticed
something interesting
while we were filming you.
So we put this together
because we thought you might
want to see it.
We got this footage in Otaru.
It's over ten years old
at this point.
[ASIRPA]
Wait. That's my kotan!
Aca!
I still remember.
That man's eyes had such
a deep blue color to them.
Huh? You're saying
that man is Wilk?
So that's what Nopperabo's
face looked like.
Then, the woman
standing next to him...
Girel thought that the two
of you must be related
to each other somehow.
I see now. Aca said
she was like a clear day.
Full of light.
Your mother looks like
she was a wonderful woman.
[gasps]
Even though he was an Ainu,
your father was insistent.
He wanted to get
a Japanese family register
so he could get married.
I joked to him
that it was a bad idea.
If a war broke out,
he'd get conscripted.
Did he end up having to fight
in the Russo-Japanese War?
[gasping]
Everyone, get out of here!
Girel! Don't let the fire
spread to the rest of the film!
[NARRATOR] The light source
of a cinematograph was called
an arc light.
It created sparks between two
conductors to generate light.
The film itself was
made of nitrocellulose,
which contained the same
ingredients for gunpowder.
Because of this, fires
were a common occurrence,
resulting in the loss of many
historically important films.
Where did she go?
[SUGIMOTO]
Hey, Asirpa!
You okay?
The cinematograph is
an amazing invention.
But it's still not enough
to preserve our way of life.
Especially for
future generations.
It let me see my mother
for the first time.
But I can't remember
any of that day.
The memories that Aca
shared with me though,
they're so strong
I can still feel their warmth.
Unless we care for
these things ourselves,
they won't be passed down.
Instead, they'll be lost.
Kiroranke Nispa showed me
how people can have
such different lives.
I learned things I wouldn't have
if I'd stayed in Hokkaido.
My journey through
Karafuto opened my eyes
to so many things.
Were Kiroranke Nispa
and Aca right?
Just how far will I
have to go to protect them?
But it doesn't mean you
have to shoulder that burden
by yourself.
Are you saying that once I find
the gold, I should go home?
That I should stay in Otaru
like nothing happened?
Sorry, but I won't do it.
I can't go back to
my old life anymore.
Kiroranke Nispa lost his life
sharing these things with me.
For better or worse,
I'm a part of this.
[SUGIMOTO] Okay, but, it
doesn't have to be you fighting.
Tell me, Sugimoto.
Is it me that you're
trying to save right now,
or is it yourself?
Admit it--you think
that by "rescuing" me,
you can somehow save
the person you were back
when you ate dried persimmons!
Yes, I think that's part of it.
I never told you what
Wilk said just before
he was shot at Abashiri.
And that his last words
were about you.
He told me that he'd
given you the skills to hide
in the mountains and fight.
He raised you to become someone
who could lead the Ainu people.
The truth is, Wilk didn't
give you a choice before
he threw you into this.
Kiroranke, too. Even if
it wasn't his intention,
he put you in a position where
you felt like the only thing
you could do was fight.
Simply because you wanted
to protect the things you love.
I will never
forgive them for that.
"Become the leader
of the Ainu and die."
"Fight and kill other
people." It's their fault.
They put those expectations
on you like a curse.
I'm just a soldier.
And I've never been a parent.
So I don't know what was
going through their heads
when they set you on this path.
But are you really okay
not having a choice?
You told me once that
if you kill somebody,
you go to some kind of Hell.
I know you aren't religious,
so how do you interpret that?
I wonder if the person who
came up with the idea of Hell
was someone like me.
Wth hands so stained with blood
they can't ever go back
to who they were.
You're still lucky enough
to not know what that's like.
So please.
I'm begging you to stop
looking for the stolen gold.
Don't stain your hands, too.
[NARRATOR] Next time:
"Sweet Lies"!